[Music]
if you've ever tried scuba diving you
know that at some point during the
descent you'll likely experience some
unpleasant sensations your ears will pop
and you're likely to feel some serious
pressure in your sinuses luckily it's
nothing serious if you do everything
correctly but what would happen to you
at the bottom of the Mariana Trench are
you indeed set on going down there to
the deepest darkest and most mysterious
part of the ocean world okay okay then
let the adventure begin I see you put on
a diving mask a wetsuit fins and gloves
and an oxygen tank are you sure that's
all the equipment you'll need to reach
the bottom of the Mariana Trench oh okay
then you take a flight and then get on a
boat that brings you to the western part
of the Pacific Ocean approximately 124
miles away from the Mariana Islands
now you're right over the 1580 mile-long
crescent-shaped trough cutting through
the Earth's crust but as far as I can
understand you'll want to get to the
very deepest point of the ocean in that
case you'll need to travel to the
southern part of the Mariana Trench
there you'll find the Challenger Deep a
small Valley at the dizzying depth of
36,000 and 37 feet however some
researchers state that the thing is even
deeper 36,000 201 feet it's so deep that
if you put Mount Everest which is the
tallest mountain in the world into the
Challenger Deep there would still be
over 1 mile between the mountains peak
and the surface of the water but right
now you're still floating in the water
next to your boat getting ready for the
dive of your life it might be unexpected
but land dwelling humans are
surprisingly good divers and as you
start submerging you don't have any
problems at first as you get deeper you
feel as if some invisible force is
squeezing you from all sides and the
pressure is getting stronger that's the
weight of the ocean trying to crush you
usually people can withstand 3 to 4
atmospheres of pressure without any
particular problems that means that you
can submerge to a depth of 130 to 140
feet and still feel fine but any deeper
than that and you begin to feel some
discomfort don't worry just yet
experiments show that the maximum
pressure people can withstand is almost
70 atmospheres and that's 70 times more
than you feel on land at sea level so
keep going and you might beat the record
set by Herbert niche an Austrian free
diver with a nickname the deepest man on
earth to break his record
you'd have to submerge deeper than he
did and that's 831 feet beneath the
surface of the ocean
but hey you're brave and strong and you
have the scuba diving equipment that's
why you manage to withstand the pressure
of 25 atmospheres and go deeper during
your descent you notice that it's
getting darker that's because you're
leaving the sunlight zone of the ocean
and going deeper to the twilight zone
which starts at a depth of 660 feet you
can still pick up the silhouettes of the
underwater inhabitants you're traveling
past but everything is dim now the ever
growing pressure starts to make you
worried you reach the mark of 1090 feet
beneath the surface and that's the
deepest a scuba diver has ever reached
it took Ahmed gobber the man who set
this record only 12 minutes to get to
this depth but almost 15 hours to get
back to the surface if he'd been
swimming up faster he wouldn't have made
it back alive due to the fatal
consequences of a too quick ascent
anyway I'm afraid it would be too risky
for you to move any deeper without
changing your scuba diving suit to
something more appropriate and secure
for example you can put on an
atmospheric diving suit hard-shelled and
equipped with everything you might need
any great depth it's something like what
astronauts wear in space and this suit
can take you to a depth of 2300 feet
below the surface when inside you won't
need to decompress or use special
breathing gas on the other hand such a
suit is super expensive bulky and truly
awkward to use so a much better option
would be to give up your dive
idea and get inside a special submarine
constructed for deep dives
now this submarine can take you to the
very bottom of the Mariana Trench don't
worry there have been attempts before
and they've ended successfully it will
take you about two and a half hours to
reach your destination at a depth of
three thousand two hundred eighty feet
your journey becomes quite boring and
monotonous as you enter the midnight
zone no sunlight gets this deep and the
water around you is blanketed in
darkness and finally you're there at the
Earth's bottom outside your submarine
the pressure is simply astonishing it's
more than 1,000 times higher than the
standard atmospheric pressure you
experience at sea level that's why if
you decided to leave your reliable
shelter for some inexplicable reason and
set foot outside eight tons of water
would press down on each square inch of
your body
in other words imagine 50 jumbo jets
placed on top of you and you can
probably guess that you wouldn't last
all that long and if your submarine
wasn't so sturdy at the bottom of the
Challenger deep well have you ever
stomped on an empty aluminum soda can to
crush it yeah well that's you also due
to this pressure the water at such depth
is incredibly bits just one unit of
volume at the bottom of the Mariana
Trench has the same mass as 100 units of
water at the surface and to make matters
worse the temperature around your
submarine is close to freezing from 34
to 39 degrees Fahrenheit but thanks to
the spotlights of your submarine you can
see that not all living beings are as
terrified of the immense pressure and
low temperatures as you are for example
look at this creature that looks like a
giant amoeba the most amazing thing
about it is that it's single-celled and
quite beautiful if we're being honest
here another inhabitant of the trench is
peeking into the submarines periscope
right now it resembles a tiny shrimp
with a compressed body
and a bit further you can spot something
that looks like a transparent sea
cucumber and apparently there are lots
of them here and finally even though you
can't see it the Challenger Deep is home
to more than 200 microorganisms that
lead a comfortable life hold up in the
cozy mud at the bottom
in other words yah we and look here
under the muck here under the sea and if
you know where that comes from leave me
a note in the comments anyway you've
seen and experienced everything you
could on this risky and unusual journey
and it's time to get back to the surface
and while your submarine is going up let
me tell you several amazing things about
the Mariana Trench and the challenger
deep even though the Challenger deep is
the deepest point of the ocean it's not
the closest to the center of the earth
this paradox exists because our planet
isn't a perfect sphere its radius is
about 16 miles smaller at the poles and
that's why some parts of the seabed in
the Arctic Ocean are on average eight
miles closer to the center of the planet
than the bottom of the Challenger Deep
the Mariana Trench is one of the oldest
sea bays on earth researchers claim that
it may be up to 180 million years old at
the bottom of the trench there are
hydrothermal vents that emit super
acidic fluids and the temperature around
these events usually reaches 572 degrees
which is three times higher than the
boiling point of water but at the same
time the liquid coming out of the vents
doesn't boil the reason is the immense
pressure of the water column above now
it may sound paradoxical but the very
hot and acidic water that comes out of
the vents is what sustains life in that
part of the ocean the thing is that this
liquid is rich in minerals that are
vital for supporting life the champagne
vent in the Mariana Trench
not far
from Taiwan is the only place on earth
where you can get liquid carbon dioxide
in case you need it the bottom of the
trench is covered with icky grayish
yellow sludge which is almost silky to
the touch it's the remains of everything
that ends up at the bottom after being
crushed by the water pressure
speaking of pressure if you learn
something new today then you'd better
give the video a like and share it with
a friend yeah just getting no pressure
and here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life
[Music]